---
title: "Destroy Stuyvesant"
date: 2018-07-01T15:26:11-04:00
draft: true
---

The proposed revisions to the SHSAT have been on everybody's mind
recently. I've heard long treatises, rants and raves about how
revising the test will lower the quality of Stuyvesant, destroying the
crown jewel of NYC public education, and ultimately bringing about the
end of days. Well, pretty damn close to that. And to that I say, well
why not? Go ahead: Destroy Stuyvesant.

The reason I say this isn't out of some nihilistic hatred of
Stuyvesant. I graduated from there and overall had a pretty great
experience. I received a pretty fantastic education in computer
science and a fairly good one in general. But I don't hold any
particular sentiment about Stuyvesant as a whole. It's a school, just
like any other. And if it were to be ground into dust, destroyed by
the hoards of bad students (which, by the way, is a highly doubtful
proposition), I would not really care. The excellent teachers would
still be teachers, the relatively decent administrators would still be
administrators, the driven, intelligent students would still be
students. They would just be at different schools.

And by spreading out these excellent teachers and students at
different schools, perhaps even schools located less than an hour's
commute from their home, maybe we could make the other schools
a little better.

You see, the dirty little secret of de Blasio's mission is that it
really wouldn't be so bad for the admission test to be a bit more
unfair. If less qualified students got in, sure Stuyvesant might
decrease in quality (I actually don't believe this, I'll explain why
later), but in turn other schools will gain valedictorians, leaders,
role models. They will gain parents who care about their kids'
education. And the kids will turn out alright too. Instead of fighting
in the gigantic arena of Stuyvesant, where hordes of students apply to
Ivies every year, the students will be academic superstars of their
school, the stratified select few who apply to the top
schools. Frankly I wouldn't have minded having that experience.

But all of this is contingent on Stuyvesant decreasing in
quality. Which I don't really believe. First of all, I highly doubt
that any change in admissions method outside of outright instituting a
quota will decrease the Asian population by more than 5 percent. If
families are willing to work two jobs, live in tiny one bedroom
apartments, etc. to pay for test prep, chances are they'll do equally
drastic measures to game other admissions methods. And de Blasio won't
implement a quota, because that's a pretty terrible PR move, not to
mention he won't be able to hide behind the whole opaque "holistic
admissions" of colleges, since hiring an admissions department is not
cost effective.

Second, I don't really think most Stuyvesant freshmen are something to
write home about. Just because you were forced to go to a prep class
after prep class, then passed a test that is solely contingent on
whether or not you went to prep for the test, doesn't mean you're hot
shit. The fact of the matter is that most Stuyvesant students are
normal, nice kids who just happen to have a family that press-ganged
them into test prep. Granted, that's not nothing. Having a family that
is willing to devote so much time and resources into your education is
a big deal. But it's a big deal whether or not you go to Stuyvesant.

Not to mention, if intelligence is evenly distributed across racial
lines, there are loads of perfectly intelligent students not going to
Stuyvesant. Sure, there may be a little less of the manic, obsessive
focus on grades. But would that really be a bad thing? Maybe we could
have a school where kids can relax, try different activities, maybe
even get some sleep. Maybe this will make Stuyvesant worse. Maybe it
won't. Who knows? In the end though, does it matter?



