---
title: "NYU Is A Terrible CS School"
date: 2018-10-24T01:03:15-04:00
draft: true
---

*This will never become a post for obvious reasons*

NYU is a terrible CS school. This is pretty obvious to anybody who has
been through the program, but unfortunately, it's not very common
knowledge outside of that. Kids look at the rankings or at the faculty
\*cough\* Yann LeCun \*cough\* and assume it's good. Well it's
not. NYU CS is an amalgam of insipid, uninspired teaching, several
compromises and just general apathy. In short, it's terrible.

Let's start with dispelling the misconceptions. Yes, first of all, NYU
has some excellent faculty in the CS department. They've done
excellent research, gone to better schools than NYU, etc,
etc. However, that's beside the point. First of all, good faculty for
courses is kind of like raising to a power. If you have excellent
courses and engaged students, a good faculty member can make a
tremendous amount of difference. With people like Gerry Sussmann or
Daniel Friedman, you can tell they made a big deal pedagogically. They
have disciples who go to other universities and teach, they write
books that are acclaimed, basically they build up a cult of
personality. However, if your students are uninspired, if your courses
are paint by the numbers, then the multiplier goes to waste. In fact,
it can be detrimental because your brilliant faculty is stuck teaching
boring material to bored students.

Second misconception, NYU's ranking matters. Good CS schools pop up in
the weirdest of places. Sure, Berkeley, MIT, etc. are great. But on
the other hand, Indiana University is killing it in the programming
language game. RPI has an amazing open source club. Who would have
thought?

Now let's move on to reasons why NYU is a terrible CS school. Well,
for one, the syllabus. For a while I would parrot the usual point that
NYU's CS is theoretical, because it sure as hell didn't look
practical. Unless you take specific optional classes, NYU students
come out of school not knowing git, any real standard of code quality,
or even a project that they wrote and maintained themeselves starting
from nothing. They don't know how to teach themselves new languages or
new libraries. In short, NYU students are a little bit useless.

But, after some introspection, I've realized that the flip side is
also not true: NYU CS is not theoretical! For one, there's a glaring
lack of theory in the curriculum. There's no type theory, no formal
methods class, no distributed systems, etc. 

And just look at the courses that *are* available! Glancing at the
courses for this year, the most common and important are Data
Structures, CSO, OS, Basic Algorithms. Those are the basic, bare
minimum courses. They're the white canvas upon which you draw the
actual important material. Frankly, if I were to teach them, it'd be a
year long sequence that'd go Data Structures + Algorithms (cause how
the hell do you do one without the other?) and CSO + OS (because then
it's just "here's how your computer works"). But anyways, calling this
theory is a disservice to theory. It's like calling Linear Algebra and
Calculus I-III "theoretical mathematics". Sure, in a very superficial
manner, that's true, but you haven't even gotten to Analysis. When I
close my eyes and imagine a top notch theory focused CS department, I
don't see Data Structures, CSO, OS, Basic Algorithms.

So what would a theory based CS curriculum look like? Well for one,
there'd be an honors track. Math has an honors track, so why doesn't
CS? There needs to be a pipeline for encouraging kids to apply to grad
school and to do novel CS research. Especially since doing interesting
CS research isn't unbelievable in undergrad. Also, that way you could
use that wonderful, world class faculty. Give them a small class of
interested students and maybe they can really make a difference.

As for course progression, I'd start with a first year intro
course. Not an intro to programming course, although it should work as
that, but more an intro to CS and program design. Something inspired
by HTDP. I'd probably do either Scheme/Racket or Haskell for honors
and JavaScript for regular. Why?  Because most programming these days
is either in JavaScript or some other scripting language with first
class functions and closures. By teaching functional programming, you
get a two for one with practical and theoretical. Right now, NYU CS
doesn't ever force you to learn a language with functions as
arguments. That's just sad.

I wouldn't let people with AP credit skip it either. Because let's be
real, the AP teaches you about as much about program design as it does
about making a french omelette. This course would run you the entirety
of freshman year and go into sorting, program design, recursion, maybe
basic big O.

Then I'd do data structures + algorithms and CSO + OS as year long
courses. Data structures + algorithms would not be the lame "here's a
review of Java and oh let's explain how hash tables work but never
implement them" class that it currently is (because it has to cater to
all the goddamn kids who got a 5 on the APCS exam and still can barely
write fizzbuzz in Java). You'd implement everything, ideally in C
cause really, value vs ref should be explicit in data structures. Sure
you'd do Dijkstra's and tower of Hanoi, but maybe you'd also do
parsing algorithms and text searching. CSO + OS should be fairly
similar to what it is right now, but ideally a little less painful
because you've been doing C in DS + A.

From there, you should be a junior and reasonably prepared. You
should have the CS equivalent of "mathematical maturity". Notice how
regardless of AP credit or not, this should be possible. This is where
a CS degree should really shine. You should have a multitude of
choices from here, from graphics to networking to compilers to
programming language design to type theory. Or, instead of endless
theory classes, you could also have practical CS classes!

Now, of course this could never be possible. No school could ever
achieve such a thing. Oh wait, what is that? Northeastern, Berkeley
and UMich all do that? Who woulda thunk?! Anyways, I have a couple
theories on why NYU doesn't do this. For one, I believe the attrition
rate for CS majors is already pretty bad. CS is a hard major, no
doubt. Especially since most schools are really bad at communicating
what skills are necessary for CS. Kids who are terrible at math, never
learned problem solving and just want a quick buck enroll thinking
they'll magically pick up CS and make 6 figures. Yeah, *that's* how
this works.

Second, there's probably a lot of kids who decide to be a CS major
like, mid sophomore year. Which, honestly, if you decide that, you
need to be placed in an intensive course. Nothing personal, but with
other subjects, you can usually assume some amount of prior knowledge
from high school. If math degrees had to start from counting, they
wouldn't get past precalculus. Not to mention programming is very much
a skill that you need to practice every single day.

And third, APCS kinda throws a wrench into NYU's progression. When you
think about it, Intro to Programming with Java is kind of a redundant
course. We already have an intro with Python, why also with Java?. The
reason is that NYU needs a course to place kids out of, while not
getting them in out of their heads. You can't just place them out of
data structures, so you need to invent some course that's vaguely
equivalent to APCS for which they can get credit.

In a nutshell, NYU CAS CS is neither theoretical nor practical, but
instead a hodge podge of slightly redundant courses with a tiny amount
of electives sprinkled on top.

But that's not all. No, there's a second issue here: culture. Plenty
of schools can't offer good courses for one reason or another. I was
complaining to my professor once about how we didn't have any classes
that teach Lisp or functional programming and he casually mentioned
how at MIT students would run their own guerrilla classes. 

At NYU?  Not a chance. Kids are too obsessed with getting a job at one
of the big tech companies or being an "entrepreneur" to actually have
curiosity. This is pretty obvious if you ever go into the Leslie eLab
or the Entrepreneurial Institute at NYU. Plenty of smug
"entrepreneurs" with their button ups and pitches all hunting for some
dumb little developer to make their brilliant ideas. Even the people
who are capable with tech only want to know the bare minimum.

Not to mention if you look at the clubs for CS, they're pitiful. The
open source club has a few dinky projects with dead GitHub
repos. The ACM club hosts "how to use git" workshops every
year. HackNYU, NYU's hackathon, doesn't even build their own
registration system. Like goddamn, there isn't even enough web
development talent at NYU to build a freaking hackathon registration
system?

By the way, the culture also explains the sparse course selection. Why
would an NYU student ever take a type theory course? It wouldn't get
them a job or help them make the next Facebook. Which is a very
depressing way of looking at learning. But I'll save the lofty
purpose-of-college argument for later.

The ultimate example of NYU's lack of a CS culture is Albert. Albert
is undeniably terrible. Nobody likes it. It's the epitome of bad
design and bad functionality. And at a school with a real, live hacker
culture, Albert would have been replaced years ago. Some kid with a
little too much time on their hands would have scraped off the data
and built their own. Heck, [that's what RPI
did!](https://yacs.cs.rpi.edu/) But NYU never did. And that's all you
need to know about NYU as a CS school.
