---
title: "Last Year at the Movies"
date: 2021-04-02T19:11:14-04:00
draft: true
---

- A Man Escaped dir. Robert Bresson

After watching Ida (2013), I was craving something similar, something
stark, minimalist and beautiful. Since a lot of reviewers compared Ida
to Bresson, I decided to watch some. I'd also tried to read Notes on
the Cinematographer. A Man Escaped is everything I craved and more. I
have a thing for methodical, old fashioned prison movies, Le Trou
(1960), being another classic. Instead of being jammed full of
unnecessarily convoluted plot twists, these films focus on character
and mood. Bresson takes his time to show the escape and to stay with
the existential and moral challenges of his protagonist. I love the
use of classical music as well, certainly something Pawel Pawlikowski
lifted in Ida's ending. The sparse, minimal mise en scene remains
remarkably memorable.


- Chungking Express dir. Wong Kar-wai

Beautiful in a hazy, blurry impressionistic way. Utterly melancholy
but delightful. I love the blurred, but still coherent
cinematography. The story structure is unconventional, especially
compared to the more conventional unconventional genre of hyperlink
films, of which we'll see a few in this list. I expected Wong Kar-wai
to weave the two plotlines. Instead he places them one after the
other. I found the first plotline a little less enticing. The
mysterious woman felt a little too much like an archetype and Takeshi
Kaneshiro's character, while wonderfully lovesick, not fully
enticing. The cans of pineapple was a nice touch however. The second
story definitely held my attention better, with Faye Wong being a
delightful, charismatic presence. The idea of her breaking into Tony
Leung's apartment was rather interesting, albeit at times oddly
nervewracking for me.

Aguirre, the Wrath of God dir. Werner Herzog

I'm not sure I fully appreciated the film, but I was certainly struck
by Klaus Kinski's menacing and quietly devastating performance. I also
see the influence on Apocalypse Now (1979) and Zama (2017).

Ivan's Childhood dir. Andrei Tarkovsky

The most un-Tarkovsky Tarkovsky. You can see Tarkovsky encumbered by
convention and precedence. It's not entirely a bad thing; the film is
certainly more accessible and enticing than Tarkovsky's later
works. There's definitely a propaganda angle, but it's well moderated
by beautiful scenes (the woods scene comes to mind) and fascinating
editing.

Vertigo dir. Alfred Hitchcock

It's good. Is it best movie ever good Probably not. I liked the
meta-commentary of falling in love with these impossible ideals of a
woman and how Jimmy Stewart tries to force a woman to be the
impossible ideal of a Hitchcockian blonde. I'd hope it's Hitchcock
being introspective about his at-times demented treatment of
actresses. I can see why film critics and scholars love the film, but
truth be told I'd be hard pressed to call it the greatest film.

Blow Up dir. Michelangelo Antonioni

I love this film. It's utterly indecipherable, it captures a zeitgeist
while adamantly refusing to engage in plot, but it nonetheless leaves
you somehow satisfied. Everything from the cruel, sexy, fashion shoots
to the tense scene of enlarging the photograph to the silent ending is
inspired. In this watch I paid closer attention to the park scene
where Thomas takes the original photos. Antonioni does wonders with
the sound of the trees and wind in the quiet, peaceful park.

La Jetée dir. Chris Marker

If there's one defining aspect of film, I'd argue it's editing. The
process of sequencing images is what makes film, film. In that
framing, La Jetée is pure film. It's incredible what sequencing and
voice over can create. The idea of circular, fatalistic time travel
reminded me of Arrival (2016).

Down By Law dir. Jim Jarmusch

Laconic, dry humor. One of the best trios in Tom Waits, John Lurie and
Roberto Benigni. Is there anybody funnier than Roberto? What this film
proves is that the prison break is really the least important
aspect. The characters, the setting, the style are all more
essential. What I love about Jim Jarmusch movies is the
simplicity. There's only a few locations, a handful of characters and
no real plot. It's all the better for it.

Sans Soleil dir. Chris Marker

Okay honestly I didn't get this film. Maybe I need to rewatch it. I
was tired, it didn't seem to have a coherent thesis and it focused a
lot on Japan which I didn't expect.

Le Samouraï dir. Jean-Pierre Melville

Do you ever watch a film and suddenly understand that everybody has
been referencing it? That was Le Samouraï for me. It's clearly
influenced a multitude of films. What I love about the film are its
low stakes. It's about a hitman who gets double crossed by some
gangsters. Normally there'd be some high stakes reveal about a
politician or some secret cabal. Nope. It's just a man, a gun and the
police. I liked that nobody is particularly stupid in the film. The
protagonist, Jef, hides his tracks well, but the police still figure
out he's the assassin. They plant a bug, but he notices his apartment
has been entered and finds it. Certainly smarter than a lot of other
protagonists.

Being John Malkovich dir. Spike Jonze

There's something about John Cusack that's so wonderfully
likeable. Even when he's playing a rather pathetic down-and-out
puppeteer, even when he's conniving, I can't help but like the
man. What I love about this film is its assuredness. Cusack is a
puppeteer who is bitterly jealous of another, more successful
puppeteer, living with a zoo's worth of animals. The movie doesn't
bother to justify any of this. And it works! At no point do you think
about the absurdity that is a world famous puppeteer.

Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind dir. Michel Gondry

Love and Anarchy dir. Lina Wertmüller

I love Giancarlo Giannini's wide eyed expressions. They're hilarious
but also perfectly capture his naive
caught-between-a-rock-and-a-hard-place character. The film is a comedy
with a bitter punchline. Sometimes though that's necessary. Sometimes
the joke isn't funny.

Adaptation dir. Spike Jonze

I love explaining this movie to people. It's about Charlie Kaufman
(who is real) attempting to adapt The Orchard Thief by Susan Orlean
(also real), which is about an orchard hunter named John Laroche (also
real). It's also an adaptation of The Orchard Thief. Oh and Charlie
has an identical twin brother, Donald (not real). And Charlie and
Donald are both played by Nicolas Cage. It's even more amazing than it
sounds.

Pickpocket dir. Robert Bresson

The Passenger dir. Michelangelo Antonioni

I don't watch enough late period films of a director. I was surprised
at how much I loved The Passenger. Jack Nicholson and Maria Schneider
are wonderful in this post-modern take on a spy film. One could argue
that Antonioni is the greatest genre filmmaker. He manages to take the
conventions of a spy film and loosely dangle them around a film that
cares far more about the characters' alienation.

I'm Thinking of Ending Things dir. Charlie Kaufman

The Terrorizers dir. Edward Yang

Da 5 Bloods dir. Spike Lee

Started rough, ended decently. It's definitely not Spike Lee's
greatest film, but there are some good performances here. Delroy Lindo
is wonderfully over the top, with some scene chewing. Chadwick Boseman
is great as well, in an unfortunately fitting role. I wish Spike dealt
more with the implications of the war on the actual
Vietnamese. Unfortunately he does fall into the trap of making a movie
about Americans pitying themselves while murdering native people.

The Player dir. Robert Altman

Not my favorite Altman. It's slick, well made and has enough inside
knowledge to be appealing, but it didn't have the same depth to its
characters as say, Nashville. Tim Robbins is great as an amoral,
selfish producer, but frankly I don't care about amoral, selfish
producers. The ending joke about the film with Bruce Willis and Julia
Roberts.

Wanda dir. Barbara Loden

Close-Up dir. Abbas Kiarostami

Varda by Agnès dir. Agnès Varda

La ciénaga dir. Lucrecia Martel

Dust In The Wind dir. Hou Hsiao-Hsien

Mother dir. Bong Joon-ho

Taipei Story dir. Edward Yang

The Master dir. Paul Thomas Anderson

The Headless Woman dir. Lucrecia Martel

Inside Llewyn Davis dir. Joel and Ethan Coen

Fallen Angels dir. Wong Kar-wai

The Killing of A Sacred Deer dir. Yorgos Lanthimo

Uncle Boonmee Who Can Recall His Past Lives dir. Apichatpong Weerasethaku

La Haine dir. Mathieu Kassovit

Lost In Translation dir. Sofia Coppola

Zama dir. Lucrecia Martel

Zabriskie Point dir. Michelangelo Antonioni

Casino Royale dir. Martin Campbell

Short Cuts dir. Robert Altman

Tree of Life dir. Terrence Malick

Skyfall dir. Sam Mendes

One Flew Over The Cuckoo's Nest dir. Miloš Forman

Spectre dir. Sam Mendes

No Fear, No Die dir. Claire Denis

Chungking Express dir. Wong Kar-wai

Stalker dir. Andrei Tarkovsky

Yi Yi dir. Edward Yang

Winter Light dir. Ingmar Bergman

Hiroshima Mon Amour dir. Alain Resnais

White Material dir. Claire Denis

Through A Glass Darkly dir. Ingmar Bergman

Do The Right Thing dir. Spike Lee

Badlands dir. Terrence Malick

Beau Travail dir. Claire Denis

The Producers dir. Mel Brooks

Memories of Murder dir. Bong Joon Ho

Austin Powers in Goldmember dir. Jay Roach

Utterly terrible. Filled with sad excuses for a joke in the form of a
call back to a (I presume) funnier previous movie. The only people who
like this movie either saw it as a child and never again or are
complete idiots. Frankly I'm suspicious about the former.

Three Billboards Outside Ebbing, Missouri dir. Martin McDonagh

Mad Max: Fury Road dir. George Miller

Irma Vep dir. Olivier Assayas

You Were Never Really Here dir. Lynne Ramsay

The New World dir. Terrence Malick

Good News dir. Charles Walters

Barton Fink dir. Joel and Ethan Coen

Throne of Blood dir. Akira Kurosawa

Night on Earth dir. Jim Jarmusch

Young Man With A Horn dir. Michael Curtiz

Ghost Dog: The Way of The Samurai dir. Jim Jarmusch

Mo' Better Blues dir. Spike Lee

My Night at Maud's dir. Eric Rohmer

We Need To Talk About Kevin dir. Lynne Ramsay

Tenet dir. Christopher Nolan

Y'know, I enjoyed it for what it is; a slighty smarter James Bond
movie. It's well shot, well acted and the plot makes some general
sense. Yeah sure the details are confusing but sometimes you gotta
ignore the lyrics and dance to the beat. People definitely exaggerate
the confusion btw.

Nomadland dir. Chloe Zhao

Vampyr dir. Carl Theodor Dreyer

Blood Simple dir. Joel and Ethan Coen

Mouchette dir. Robert Bresson

The Silence dir. Ingmar Bergman

McCabe & Mrs Miller dir. Robert Altman

This might surpass Nashville as my favorite Altman. I love how Altman
grapples with America and Americans; who we are; how we came to be;
how we live together; and how we fall apart. McCabe & Mrs Miller is a
perfect instance of this. The film isn't just about these two
characters. It's about a town being born, about a microcosm of
America. It's about masculinity and how it imprisons us, how it gets
us killed.
