---
title: "Asianness"
date: 2020-04-25T03:54:57-04:00
draft: true
---

What does it mean to be Asian? If we take that literally, it's to be
from Asia. And yes, many parts of Asia are undeniably categorized as
Asian. China/Korea/Japan? Definitely. Same with SE Asia. What about
South Asia like India, Pakistan, Bangladesh, etc.? Sure, though there
are some that restrict Asian to solely East Asian.

But past that point it gets tricky. There's a devious little Bactrian
border, that once you cross, you start getting more and more pushback
if you label them as Asian. Talk to someone from Georgia or Armenia,
or even Israel (yes, Israel is in Asia), and they'll quickly tell you
that no, they're not Asian.

The answer you'll often get is that they're *culturally* more
European. I don't buy it. If you're in Asia then your culture by
definition is Asian. The US and England share lots of cultural
similarities, moreso than Mexico and the US. Yet the US is not
European or British.

What's interesting is that this is specific to Asia. Nobody in Africa
says that they're really *culturally* more European and therefore not
African. I guess what makes it kind of believable is that there's no
real hard border between Europe and Asia. But c'mon Georgia. You're
not fooling anybody.

Why this insistence? It doesn't take much knowledge of history to
understand that Europe has been associated with power, both cultural
and physical. Russia is a famous example of a country that understood
the imperative need to be considered European, not Asian. 

How can we define Asian then? This is a tricky point. 
