---
title: "Boring Ass Classes"
date: 2018-03-14T23:01:57-04:00
draft: false
---

Let's imagine you're a first year physics student. You've never taken
a physics class in your life. You've never even conducted a simple
physics experiment in your life. The only thing you know about physics
is that it's used to make bridges and it has something to do with
electricity, motion, and gravity. You like the idea of making bridges,
so you decided to become a physics major. So you take your first class
and you realize that your professor doesn't know the first thing about
bridges. Sure, maybe ten years ago they dabbled in building one, maybe
they even build a Popsicle stick one every now and then. But a real
life bridge? Nope. Instead, they go over calculus and Lagrangians,
maybe harmonic motion too.

You start to get really really confused and then really really
bored. When are we going to make bridges? Looking at the courses
offered, you see a basic bridge building class. Only issue? It's a
junior level class with partial differential equations as a
prerequisite. And after talking with other students, you hear that the
material is horribly outdated; the professor only teaches how to build
wooden bridges.

This is basically NYU CS in a gist. Most NYU students take Intro to
Computer Programming, followed by Data Structures, followed by
Computer Systems Organization. In these classes, you learn the
following languages: Java and C. That's it. And frankly it doesn't get
much better. After CSO, there's Operating Systems and Basic
Algorithms, two courses that use maybe a little bit of C and that's
it.

Now C and Java are great languages. I personally like coding in them a
lot, and I find the material in all the NYU classes rather interesting
and fun. Only issue? I'm not your average NYU CS student. I'm already
sold on computer science and programming. I've have real code pushed
to production, learned other languages besides Java and C, even taught
myself some theory. But other kids haven't. They don't know what real
software development looks like. So when they see pointer arithmetic
and the tedium of Java, they start to think that this is it, that this
is the entirety of software development. Frankly if I thought that C
and Java were the *ne plus ultra* of software development, I probably
wouldn't be a programmer.

And by the way, I'm not saying we should dumb down CS courses or
[create
JavaSchools](https://www.joelonsoftware.com/2005/12/29/the-perils-of-javaschools-2/).
If I had my way CS curricula would be **brutal**. But you gotta give
some sort of incentive. You gotta sweeten the deal. Maybe make a web
dev class a mandatory part of the curriculum. Or give a Ruby or Python
class. Just *something* to lessen the onslaught of Java and C and
maybe, just maybe give an inkling of what their future career is going
to look like.

Granted, this is a CS degree, not a programming or software
development degree. But since NYU does not offer a programming or
software development degree, and since most people who go through a CS
degree plan on becoming a software developer, perhaps the degree
should teach some aspects of software development.

For instance, why aren't there projects with actual, y'know, user
interfaces? Look, I get it, Java and C are standard, bread and butter
languages. But they also are terrible terrible languages for creating
user interfaces. Give students some basic webdev and let them build a
simple user facing application. Not only do they get a semi realistic
experience, but they also get useful skills. Skills like usability,
design, aesthetics, performance optimization (when it counts), handling
clients, etc. And this shouldn't be the capstone or the climax of the
degree. This should be like the first or second course students
take. Lure them in, then slam them with the brutal pointers and
functional programming classes.

Finally, do you know why I know that NYU isn't doing a good job of
this?  Because [Albert Sucks](https://albertsucks.com/) and if a
website sucked this bad in a school where they actually taught
software development, students would have built a better Albert. But
they didn't. And that says everything about NYU.
