---
title: "Devs: S1 E1"
date: 2020-03-29T01:11:52-04:00
draft: true
---

I subscribe to IndieWire on Facebook and I've been noticing their
~~thinly veiled advertisements~~ posts on Alex Garland's new show,
Devs. Garland, for those of you who don't know, is a filmmaker who
directed Ex Machina and Annihilation, along with writing movies such
as 28 Days Later.

I haven't seen Annihilation, but I did see Ex Machina. While I found
Ex Machina overall a decent film, I don't quite understand the overly
enthusiastic praise it received. Yes, the film was well shot, albeit
in the glossy modern sci-fi manner that attempts to pass as visually
inventive. Yes, the acting was good. But the characters were not as
well fleshed out as one would like. Nathan, the rich billionaire,
supposedly invented his company's algorithm at 12 years old. Putting
aside the unrealistic aspects of that, I'd imagine that being so
brilliant at such a young age would have an impact on his
character. Perhaps there would be a slight distance or pause to his
reactions. But instead he's a tech bro with a nice beard and lacking
morality. Alas, I digress.

Devs opens up with a shot of Nick Offerman as Forest, a tech
billionaire with a nice beard (Alex appears to have a type), staring
at an overly bright image of a young child. There's some clear CGI
going on with the image, which is also very apparent in the landscapes
and buildings. I'm not super opposed to obvious CGI and I understand
that TV budgets don't always allow for perfect work, but a lot of the
 CGI did not feel warranted.

We're quickly introduced to Lily and Sergei, a couple who are both
programmers at Amaya, a large tech corporation a la Google, Facebook,
etc. They're nerdy but cool! After some tech banter that's fairly
accurate, they head off to their clean, glossy modern tech
offices in the woods. There's a gigantic statue of a young girl there,
but that just seems to be Amaya's weird branding. Weird tech company
branding? Not unrealistic.

Sergei gives a demo of a model that predicts a nematode's movements
while Nick Offerman scarfs down some vegetables. Predicting a
nematode's movements? Kinda realistic. A little advanced but definitely
in the realm of possibility. Boss showing up late and eating during
your meeting? Definitely realistic.

Yadda yadda, Sergei impresses Forest, he gets an offer to join
Devs. After one slightly racist meeting with the head of security,
Sergei gets a tour of Devs by Forest. Devs, of course, is hosted in an
insane building that would immediately cause a massive amount of
attention in real life. And of course it's chock full of conspicuous
CGI. Ah well.

Why is it that sci-fi locations always have terrible lighting?  The
Devs labs are filled with reflective gold and pulsing light. Great if
you're Jared Leto overacting in Blade Runner 2049, not so great if
you, y'know, want to get work done.

There's, naturally, some shots of the Devs workspace separate from
Sergei, which reads as an overly ambitious architecture student's
renderings. I get it, you want to show off your amazing world. But I'd
prefer to have that exploration grounded in the protagonist's
perspective. That way you can slowly introduce the world and build it
in a coherent manner. At least shoot from the perspective of your
character and not from Architectural Digest's.

Sergei looks at the code, gets freaked out and starts losing it in the
bathroom. Nice touch honestly. Seeing him lose his composure so
quickly did make me wonder what he saw. I'm not sold on a lot in
Devs, but I will say that the show knows how to draw me in.

Sergei gets introduced to Katie, Forest's apparent right hand
person. Cut to him leaving at night. Forest stops him in the, heh,
Forest, where Sergei is revealed to have taken photos with his
watch. Stuff happens, whatever, don't read reviews if you want no
spoilers, and now we're following Lily. The music during this part is
a little dramatic for my taste. It's not *bad* but I personally feel
like certain, \*ahem\* sound effects would be more effective. Also
there's a very on the nose shot of Nick Offerman with an LED circle,
aka halo over his head.

If you've read anything about the show, this protagonist switch isn't
that much of a surprise. Lily is played by Sonoya Mizuno who's
collaborated with Garland in Ex Machina and Annihilation. She was
pretty good in Ex Machina as a silent robot/servant, but I can't say
that was a weighty part. She's...not great here. The line delivery is
off, with her lines appearing to awkwardly dangle at the end. I don't
want to sound unduly harsh. I try to make a good faith effort to root
for the actor. But her performance just isn't inspiring.

Lily goes to the same slightly-racist head of security and he shows
her footage of Sergei apparently leaving campus and walking to the
freeway. Not what we saw. Forest appears and continues the charade,
appearing to help Lily find Sergei. This does provide a nice amount of
mystery. Why are they playing this game? What do they want to
accomplish?

Lily makes an interesting observation that Sergei appears to be
walking "like a zombie". Interesting foreshadowing, for what I'm not
sure. Eventually she goes back home, where upon entering she half
heartedly calls out for Sergei. I found this a pretty nice little
moment. It's the perfect kind of
thing-you-do-then-immediately-feel-stupid-for-doing.

Lily clones Sergei's phone and finds a Sudoku app, which is apparently
weird since Sergei hates Sudoku. Who actually has an opinion on
Sudoku? Anyways it's password protected. Which is pretty lazy. I'd
hide a sketch password screen behind a menu at least. The app allows
for two more tries before the data is wiped.

Meanwhile Forest sits alone and sad. Katie shows up and has the sort
of classic coded conversation with Forest that every sci-fi tv show
looooves. Mysterious ambiguous lines of dialogue! Words that will mean
more in the future! What mystery!

Lily visits her ex, Jamie to help crack the password. who then has the
most goddamn clunky expository monologue where he explains their
entire relationship. Oh man. Yes, it does make Lily a little more
complex, seeing how she ended a relationship. But do that in parts!
Don't just dump it all out in one scene! Anyways Jamie says fuck you,
goodbye and leaves. Huh, I *wonder* if he'll show up in like the next
episode?

Some other stuff happens with Sergei and Sonoya gets a dramatic crying
scene. It's...okay. Scene.

Notes

- Why are there people waiting to get on the commuter
shuttle when it arrives at the campus? It's a commuter shuttle. Are
people leaving campus this early?

- Why are people typing so much in demos? Most of my demos were
completely planned and staged in advance. Demos should have no
surprises!

- The code looks like Python or something with Python DNA. Some
  [QFT](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quantum_field_theory) involved.

- Random shots of San Francisco don't need to be there. We know we're
  in SF.

- I hate it when the camera moves just for the sake of movement, that
ort of slow drifting track or pan that makes me feel like I'm in a
video game landing page. Especially when combined with the previous
note.

- Nobody says "AI coder"

- The security cam footage gave me "[Workers Leaving the
](http://www.andrewnormanwilson.com/WorkersGoogleplex.html)"
vibes.

- That footage definitely would not be shown to a bereaved significant
  other. And certainly not in a room with several other people.

- Garland has a habit of lighting the scenes in a way that tends to blow
them out while overexposing the background. Don't know why. It's the
worst of both worlds.

![Bad lighting!](/img/posts/devs-episode-01/01.jpg)

