---
title: "Stackoverflow Isnt Everything"
date: 2018-07-26T14:56:46-04:00
draft: false
---

There's a lot of memes and jokes online about developers' dependency
on StackOverflow.

![My second favorite ORLY
cover](/img/posts/stackoverflow-isnt-everything/stackoverflow_orly.jpg)

And to an extent it's true. StackOverflow is a pretty essential tool
in a modern developer's kit. I've used it a lot, for everything from
iOS code signing issues to Rails bugs. However, as I've progressed in
my projects, I've started to use StackOverflow less and less. There's
a few reasons for this.

For one, there are problems where StackOverflow straight up doesn't
help. Problems such as writing your own language, or working with
obscure tools or libraries that don't have a whole lot of
users. Basically, if you're going into territory no man (or woman) has
been before, it's unlikely StackOverflow can help you. For instance,
the chances I'll get a decent answer about the inner workings of the
Ruby interpreter through SO are pretty much slim to none.

Second, there's time limits. If you *shudder*, actually ask a question
on SO instead of just looking at previous answers, you might be
looking at a few hours or even a few days before you get a good
answer. That's not a knock against SO, quality takes time. But
sometimes when you have a hard deadline, or are just impatient like
me, a few days isn't good enough.

And finally, if you're working on the cutting edge, let's say a
prerelease beta of your favorite JS library, or a version of a
language you build from source, then chances are the well intentioned
advice of most StackOverflow users might not apply. Again, not their
fault, just special situation.

So what do you do? Do you curl up into a ball and wait the time until
you get a StackOverflow answer? Do you give up and quit programming?
Well, you *could*, or you could do the following:

1. **Open an issue** This is especially useful if you're working on
   the cutting edge prerelease alpha build, or if you're working on
   something that requires niche knowledge that only a few developers
   have. Usually in good open source projects people are fairly
   responsive and polite. They'll help you with your issue, and maybe
   even add new functionality to their software if you ask
   politely. Most projects these days use GitHub, but even if they're
   using a mailing list or a bug tracker, issues are a great way to
   get involved in the open source community.
   
2. **Email someone** This is a bit more direct, so it depends on how
   urgent your issue is. Often times developers will have a public
   email, either on their GitHub or personal website. Of course, don't
   do this for your average "I forgot a semicolon" issue. But it's
   fantastic for issues that are specific, somewhat technically
   interesting or very very urgent. Just be polite and remember they
   aren't your personal tech support.
   
3. **Read a book** Contrary to popular belief, programming books
   didn't suddenly disappear once StackOverflow became a
   thing. There's plenty of great, informative books on basically
   every topic imaginable. Not only can they provide good insight into
   certain languages and tools, they can give more depth and thought
   than even the most thorough Jon Skeet answer. Need an answer that
   requires real, capitalized Computer Science? Read a book.
   
4. **Read the damn code** Can't make heads or tails of your issue?
   Have an error that isn't understandable? Find the source code,
   clone the repo and read the damn code. It's fast, effective and you
   don't have to talk to anybody. Social interaction? **The
   horror**. Not to mention, you also gain a deeper understanding of
   the code you're using. Which means you can be the one to answer the
   next StackOverflow question on this topic.

5. **Patch the damn code** Let's say you did read the code. You read
   it and there's a glaring issue with the code. Maybe they forgot to
   take into account some issue you're having. Maybe it's just
   buggy. Well sure you could wait for someone to hold your hand and
   fix the code. Or you could fork the repo and just fix it your damn
   self. You get experience, open source street cred, and your problem
   is solved as fast as you can patch.
   
And really, depending on StackOverflow for everything is kinda sad. I
get that it's a joke, but behind the joke is a very true reality:
Developers aren't honing their problem solving skills but instead just
relying on StackOverflow to think for them. But really, limiting
yourself to StackOverflow is limiting yourself to what StackOverflow
contributors can help you with. You can't push the envelope or try new
things if you just rely on StackOverflow.
   
